`variables` and expressions: Introduce (#240)
pals-project/pals: source/fundamentals.md

The `classical_radius_factor` is a useful number when converting a formula that involves the classical
electron or proton radius to a formula for something other than an electron or proton.

Other constants and variables may be defined using `constant` or `variable` as the `kind`.
The difference between a constant and a variable is that a constant is not supposed to be

> varied after a program reads a PALS file while a variable can vary. Since what happens

Reviewer: I find lines 201-206 very confusing. Also, something like:
- my_var
    kind: constant
    value: expr(...)

should be illegal, hence PALS should not treat constant and variables the same.

Author: Documentation has been modified. Please take a look.

The `classical_radius_factor` is a useful number when converting a formula that involves the classical
electron or proton radius to a formula for something other than an electron or proton.

Other constants and variables may be defined using `constant` or `variable` as the `kind`.
The parameters associated with a constant or variable are:
```{code} yaml
  absolute_error: 0       # Absolute error.       
  relative_error: 0       # Relative error.
  value                   # Constant or variable value.
```
If both `absolute_error` and `relative_error` are specified, 
the true error is `absolute_error + relative_error * |value|`.

> Constants and variables must be defined directly under the `PALS` node or the `facility` node. 

Reviewer 2: Adding here when they are evaluated would be useful (i.e., to make the parser implementations clear).

Because variables can be re-set later on, just evaluating them upfront will not do the trick, and we need to specify their evaluation order to lattice reading, lattice expansion, and other function and expression evaluations here cleanly.

Author: See the discussion further down.

        kind: constant
        value: 1.45 * c_light
        relative_error: 0.02
    - my_var:
        kind: variable
        value: 37
    ...
```

For constants or variables that only have a value, an alternative compact form has the syntax:
```{code} yaml
  - constants:
      - const_a: value_a        # Define const_a
      - const_b: value_b        # Define const_b
      - const_c: pi * const_a   # Can use expressions.
      ...
  - variables:
      - var_a: var_val_a        # Define var_a
      ...
```
The difference between a constant and a variable is one of intent of the PALS file creator.
That is, a constant is not supposed to be

> varied after a program reads a PALS file while a variable can vary. 

Reviewer: Perhaps include examples? E.g.:

That is, a constant (e.g., the strength of a permanent magnet) is not supposed to be varied after a program reads a PALS file while a variable (e.g., the strength of a magnet that varies during operations) can vary.

Author: OK I put in an example.

        kind: constant
        value: 1.45 * c_light
        relative_error: 0.02
    - my_var:
        kind: variable
        value: 37
    ...
```

For constants or variables that only have a value, an alternative compact form has the syntax:
```{code} yaml
  - constants:
      - const_a: value_a        # Define const_a
      - const_b: value_b        # Define const_b
      - const_c: pi * const_a   # Can use expressions.
      ...
  - variables:
      - var_a: var_val_a        # Define var_a
      ...
```
The difference between a constant and a variable is one of intent of the PALS file creator.
That is, a constant is not supposed to be

> varied after a program reads a PALS file while a variable can vary. For example, a constant could

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
varied after a program reads a PALS file, while a variable can vary. For example, a constant could
```

> be the length of a magnet which will not change while a variable could be a magnet strength which

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
be the length of a magnet which will not change, while a variable could be a magnet strength which
```

abs(x)                   # Absolute Value
factorial(n)             # Factorial
random()                 # Uniform random number between 0 and 1
ran_gauss()              # Gaussian distributed random number with unit sigma and zero mean

> ran_gauss(sig_cut)       # Same ran_gauss() but with a probability tail cutoff.

Reviewer 2: If we have `random` I would also use `random_gauss`:
```suggestion
random_gauss()              # Gaussian distributed random number with unit sigma and zero mean
random_gauss(sig_cut)       # Same random_gauss() but with a probability tail cutoff.
```

Author: Changed.

> random_gauss(sig_cut)    # Same random_gauss() but with a probability tail cutoff.

Reviewer 2: We need to introduce seed-control for all existing and new RNGs or we will have issues with reproducibility and interoperability.

Author: I will leave that to a future PR...

charge_of(A)             # Charge, in units of the elementary charge, of particle A 
anomalous_moment_of(A)   # Anomalous magnetic moment of particle A
```
The `ran_gauss(sig_cut)` function produces a Gaussian distributed random number with unit sigma
and zero mean modified so that all random numbers will be in the range `[-sig_cut, sig_cut]`.
 

> When `random` or `ran_gauss` functions are used in a single expression that sets multiple parameters,

Reviewer 2: If we have `random` I would also use `random_gauss`:
```suggestion
The `random_gauss(sig_cut)` function produces a Gaussian distributed random number with unit sigma
and zero mean modified so that all random numbers will be in the range `[-sig_cut, sig_cut]`.
 
When `random` or `random_gauss` functions are used in a single expression that sets multiple parameters,
```

Author: Changed.

a different random number is generated for each parameter. For example, 
```{code} yaml
- set:
    parameter: B1.*>BendP.e1
    value: 0.01 + 0.003 * ran_gauss()
```
In this example, the `BendP.e1` parameter of all elements whose name begins with `B1` is modified.
If there are {math}`N` lattice elements that match the name `B1.*`, {math}`N` different random
numbers need to be generated for the calculation.

In addition, there is the `expr()` construct which is used to designate 
"delayed evaluation" expressions. See [](#s:expressions) for details.

%---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(s:expressions)=
## Mathematical Expressions

Mathematical expressions can be used in place of real values. Expressions may use the functions 
as listed in the [](#s:functions) section as well as [constants and variables](#s:constants). 
Standard math symbols `+` plus, `-` minus, `*` times, `/` divide, and `^` power, along with
parentheses `(...)`, are valid.
Example:
```{code} yaml
- variables:
    a_var: 3.75e7 / c_light^2
    b_var: -0.34

> cleo:            

Reviewer 2: missing `-` in the list?

Author: Fixed.

    kind: Solenoid
    length: 0.1*log(abs(b_var))
    MagneticMultipoleP:
      Kn1: expr(3.74 * a_var)
```
This sets the length of the `cleo` element to `0.1*log(abs(b_var))` and the `Kn1` parameter
to `3.74 * a_var`. 

There are two types of expressions
that are commonly called "immediate evaluation" and "delayed evaluation" expressions.
Immediate evaluation expressions are expressions that, once a PALS file is read in by a program,
are meant to be immediately evaluated and never reevaluated. That is, what is stored is the
value of the expression and the expression used to compute the value can be ignored thereafter. 
Delayed evaluation on the other hand are meant to be retained by the program and, if any
variables in the expression change, the program should update the value automatically.
Delayed evaluation expressions are denoted in a PALS file using the `expr(...)` construct,
as in the example above, where the expression for `Kn1` (`3.74 * a_var`) is a delayed
expression. The `expr(...)` construct must enclose the entire expression. That is, something
like `3.74 * expr(a_var)` is invalid. Note that whether an expression is delayed or immediate is

> determined solely by whether the expression is wrapped in `expr(...)` or not. The fact

Reviewer 2: In order to implement this unambiguous, we need to clarify and document: When are the delayed expressions evaluated?
What is their evaluation/concretization precedence to:
- includes
- lattice expansion
- `set`
- `Controller` evaluations
- inheritance/referencing of other element properties?

Author: I have added a new section on evaluation order.

Reviewer 2: Awesome, I'll add questions inline for clarity.

that an expression may contain a variable (see the `length` expression in the above example), 
is not a consideration.
The exception is that [controller](#s:controller) expressions are always considered to be delayed. 
Also note that what a program actually does is outside of the PALS purview. The designation of

> immediate or delayed is only a "hint" to the program of what the lattice designer intends.

Reviewer 2: Making something as essential as global `expr()`-support in a reader optional could hurt PALS file interoperability?
Interoperability is the primary purpose of PALS, the same file would produce different physics if `expr` are ignored.

Author: Interoperability should not be an issue. Everything can be computed by the PALS parser and given to the calling program so the calling program can just use the values and ignore any expressions. Expressions are just for programs that can use them and want to vary the variables using the expressions. Note: Any program can do optimization on any set of parameters for stuff like lattice design independent of any expressions.

Reviewer 2: What I meant was: it will make it harder to implement PALS parser(s), if we desire to implement more than 1-2 reference implementations. Maybe we want to stay with 1-2 powerful, interpreter-like parsers and only the final expanded lattice is concrete and statically able to be validated with schemas.

Author: As mentioned in the meeting, lattice expansion is complicated so as a practical matter I don't see the utility in trying to keep things simple to accommodate more reference implementations. Another point is "expr()" is a very minor complication.

Reviewer 2: I think we can keep it minor if we define (limit) the interaction (precedence and mixing) with other dynamic features of PALS well.

Author: I agree.

%---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(s:expressions)=
## Mathematical Expressions

Mathematical expressions can be used in place of real values. Expressions may use the functions 
as listed in the [](#s:functions) section as well as [constants and variables](#s:constants). 
Standard math symbols `+` plus, `-` minus, `*` times, `/` divide, and `^` power, along with
parentheses `(...)`, are valid.
Example:
```{code} yaml
- variables:
    a_var: 3.75e7 / c_light^2
    b_var: -0.34

- cleo:            
    kind: Solenoid
    length: 0.1*log(abs(b_var))
    MagneticMultipoleP:
      Kn1: expr(3.74 * a_var)
```
This sets the length of the `cleo` element to `0.1*log(abs(b_var))` and the `Kn1` parameter
to `3.74 * a_var`. 

There are two types of expressions
that are commonly called "immediate evaluation" and "delayed evaluation" expressions.
Immediate evaluation expressions are expressions that, once a PALS file is read in by a program,
are meant to be immediately evaluated and never reevaluated. That is, what is stored is the
value of the expression and the expression used to compute the value can be ignored thereafter. 

> Delayed evaluation on the other hand are meant to be retained by the program and, if any

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Delayed evaluation expressions, on the other hand, are meant to be retained by the program and, if any
```

The exception is that [controller](#s:controller) expressions are always considered to be delayed. 
Also note that what a program actually does is outside of the PALS purview. The designation of
immediate or delayed is only a "hint" to the program of what the lattice designer intends.

%---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(s:evaluation)=
## Evaluation Order

A PALS compliant parser will do the following when reading in a PALS file:
As a PALS file is parsed, the order of evaluations of expressions, 
[`expand_lattice`](#s:expand.lat) command, [controllers](#s:controller), etc. are as follows:

- A "merged" tree is constructed where any include files are merged into the root file tree.

- The controllers are evaluated last as a group. Controllers with a `RELATIVE` `control_type` do
not initially affect any parameters (it is only if the program reading the PALS file later varies a 
RELATIVE controller variable that there is any effect). The ABSOLUTE controllers form a hierarchy
that can be evaluated from top to bottom.

- For everything else, evaluation starts at the first `facility` child and works downward.

> delayed evaluation equations are evaluated along with all other equations. There is no difference

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Delayed evaluation equations are evaluated along with all other equations. There is no difference
```

> here.

Reviewer 2: Let us write explicitly also:
- When are [inheritances](https://pals-project.readthedocs.io/en/latest/lattice-element-parameters.html#naming-and-inheriting-parameters) evaluated and can other elements be referenced inside `expr()`?
- What happens if I inherit from an element or element parameter that is a deferred expression?

Author: This is a delicate question that needs to be discussed on its own.  I have created an Issue #253 and will open a PR when I have formulated something.

Note: A PALS parser will both compute parameter values and will preserve the underlying equations
so a program that can use the equations will have them available but other programs can just
use the values for lattice calculations. In any case, any program can do optimization on any set 

> of parameters for stuff like lattice design independent of any expressions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
of parameters (for tasks such as lattice design) independent of any expressions.
```
